Here's the Cliff's Notes to updating your sensors when a new distribution is released.  This page assumes you have already successfully installed and configured the sensor of interest. If you are installing a sensor for the first time, you should follow the instructions in the User Guide for your sensor.  Links to these user guides can be found in the ComponentDirectory page.

## 1. Download Sensors Distribution ##

  * Go to the V8 home page: http://code.google.com/p/hackystat/

  * Click on the first "Featured Download", such as "hackystat-8.1.218-sensors-bin.zip"

  * Unzip into a directory like "public\_hackystat/".

## 2. Clean up your logs/ and offline/ directories ##

Upgrading a sensor is a good time to perform some quick housekeeping on your logs and offline directories.  These directories are found in the ~/.hackystat/sensorshell/ directory.

To "maintain" the logs/ directory, simply rename it to logs.old/.  This is a good thing to do because if you encounter a problem after installing your new sensor(s), you know that the logs/ directory (which is created automatically by the sensors if it is missing) will contain only files generated by the new release of the sensor.  This will make diagnosis of any problems much easier.  Old log files generally are not useful, so you can delete any older versions of logs.old/ when you do this renaming.

The offline directory should not contain any files unless you have just been working offline.  It is good to check to see if there are any files in there before doing an upgrade.  If you find that there are a large number of files in there,and you have not been working offline for an extended period, then this indicates a problem with your sensor installation.  Rename offline/ to offline.old/ and contact your hackystat administrator (or the hackystat-users mailing list) for guidance.

## 3. Update Ant Sensors ##

  * Update your ~/.ant/lib directory with the new version of antsensors.jar, which is found in the hackystat-sensor-ant subdirectory of the binary distribution.

## 4. Update Eclipse ##

  * Close Eclipse.

  * Copy the jar file from the new distribution's hackystat-sensor-eclipse directory to your Eclipse plugins directory.  The jar file is named something like: org.hackystat.sensor.eclipse\_8.1.v20080218.jar.

## 5. Update Emacs ##

  * Close Emacs.

  * Edit your .emacs to refer to the latest release, such as:
```
(defvar hackystat*user-home "C:\\Documents and Settings\\johnson\\")
(defvar system-distribution "C:\\public_hackystat\\hackystat-8.1.218-sensors-bin\\")
(defvar hackystat*sensorshell*file-path (concat system-distribution "hackystat-sensor-shell/"))
(load-file (concat system-distribution "hackystat-sensor-emacs/sensor-package.el"))
```

  * Restart Emacs.

## 6. Verify ##

  * Use your tools, make sure that data is being sent.

## Appendix A: Upgrading Ant Sensors for Hackystat developers ##

If you are a developer of Hackystat (or using the standard Hackystat build file structure which includes common.build.xml), then you can auto-update your Ant sensors with the following two Ant commands:

```
ant update-library-versions-properties
ant install-sensors
```

Note that these two tasks cannot be combined in a single call to Ant, since the library.versions.properties update does not take effect until the next invocation of Ant.