#summary How to install JavaMail

*Table of Contents*

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

Some Hackystat Services, such as the [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensorbase-uh/ SensorBase], send emails in response to certain conditions.  To support this behavior in Java, you should install !JavaMail.  This page explains how to do this.

= 1. Download the !JavaMail 1.4 libraries. =

The !JavaMail libraries are available at: [http://java.sun.com/products/javamail/ http://java.sun.com/products/javamail/].

After downloading and unzipping, you should obtain a directory such as the following:

{{{
~/javamail-1.4/
}}}

It will contain a lib/ directory with the jar files that you will need to install.

== 1.1 (Java 5 only) Download the !JavaBeans Activation Framework ==

If you are using Java 5, you must also download the !JavaBeans Activation Framework 1.1 from [http://java.sun.com/products/javabeans/jaf/index.jsp http://java.sun.com/products/javabeans/jaf/index.jsp]. 

If you are using Java 6, this comes pre-installed. 

= 2. Copy !JavaMail jar files to the {java}/lib/ext directory =

To install !JavaMail, you need to copy mail.jar to the lib/ext directory.

If you are using Java 5, you also need to copy activation.jar from the !JavaBeans Activation Framework library. 

The location to which you copy these files depends upon your operating system.

|| *OS* || *Typical location of lib/ext directory* ||
|| Mac OS/X || /System/Library/Frameworks/JavaVM.framework/Versions/CurrentJDK/Home/lib/ext  ||
|| Windows || C:\Java\jre1.5.0_7\lib\ext ||

Note that in Windows, you must be careful to install it in the "JRE" directory, not the "JDK" directory.

= 3. Define JAVAMAIL_HOME (if building Hackystat) =

If you are just downloading a binary distribution of Hackystat and running sensorbase.jar, you do not have to define JAVAMAIL_HOME.

If you are building Hackystat from sources, you will need to define JAVAMAIL_HOME to point to the downloaded distribution of the system. 

Example:
{{{
JAVAMAIL_HOME = c:\java-tools\javamail-1.4
}}}

= 4. Verifying your installation =

Unfortunately, we don't currently have a simple way to verify that you have installed !JavaMail correctly.  What we do know is that if you don't have !JavaMail installed, then Hackystat services like the [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensorbase-uh/ SensorBase] will print the following error message on startup:

{{{
05/24 11:57:29  ERROR: JavaMail not installed correctly! Mail services will fail!
}}}

So, one way to test your !JavaMail installation is to run the !SensorBase and see that this error message is not printed out.