#summary Standard library versions and environment variables

== Standard External Libraries, Variable Names, Versions ==

Building a Hackystat system from sources generally requires one or more supplemental libraries.  To facilitate development, this page lists libraries or other development infrastructure used in multiple Hackystat systems, along with their associated environment variable name (used by Ant) and classpath variable name (used by Eclipse).

|| *Library* || *Standard Version* || *Standard Environment/Classpath Variable* || *Sample Env Value* ||
|| [http://ant.apache.org/ Ant] || 1.7.0 || ANT_HOME || c:\apache-ant-1.7.0 ||
|| [http://checkstyle.sourceforge.net/ CheckStyle] || 4.3 || CHECKSTYLE_HOME || c:\java-tools\checkstyle-4.3 ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/gwt-chronoscope Timepedia Chronoscope] || N/A || CHRONOSCOPE_HOME || c:\java-tools\chronoscope ||
|| [http://db.apache.org/derby/ Derby] || 10.2.2.0 ||  DERBY_HOME || c:\java-tools\db-derby-10.2.2.0-bin ||
|| [http://emma.sourceforge.net/ EMMA] || 2.0.5312 ||  EMMA_HOME || c:\java-tools\emma-2.0.5312 ||
|| [http://findbugs.sourceforge.net/ FindBugs] || 1.2.0 || FINDBUGS_HOME || c:\java-tools\findbugs-1.2.0 ||
|| [http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/versions.html Google Web Toolkit] || 1.4.10 || GWT_HOME || c:\java-tools\gwt-mac-1.4.10 ||
|| [http://java.sun.com/ Java] || 1.5 or 1.6 || JAVA_HOME || c:\java\jdk1.5.0_07 || 
|| [http://www.clarkware.com/software/JDepend.html JDepend] || 2.9 || JDEPEND_HOME || c:\java-tools\jdepend-2.9 ||
|| [http://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/download.html JFreeChart] || 1.0.5 || JFREECHART_HOME ||  c:\java-tools\jfreechart-1.0.5 ||
|| [http://www.junit.org JUnit] || 4.4 || JUNIT_HOME ||   c:\java-tools\junit4.4 ||
|| [http://pmd.sourceforge.net/ PMD] || 4.0 || PMD_HOME ||   c:\java-tools\pmd-4.0 ||
|| [http://www.restlet.org/ Restlet] || 1.0.5 || RESTLET_HOME ||   c:\java-tools\restlet-1.0.5 ||
|| [http://tomcat.apache.org/ Tomcat] || 6.0.13 || CATALINA_HOME ||  c:\java-tools\apache-tomcat-6.0.13 ||

Consult the Developer Guide for a system to learn which of these external libraries are required.   If it is required, you will need to download it, set up the environment variable, and then bring up a new console shell/window so that the environment variable is defined before running Ant. 

Note that Ant does not like paths containing embedded spaces, so please do
not install any of the following packages in directories or subdirectories
of "Program Files" or "Documents and Settings", for example.

== Referencing Dependent Hackystat Systems ==

Some Hackystat systems require access to the pre-built binaries of other Hackystat systems.  For example, several Hackystat systems access the !SensorBase using the !SensorBaseClient class which is available via the sensorbase.jar file.  Here are the standard names for environment variables and classpath variables for such Hackystat systems, as well as a value based upon a System Distribution. 

|| *Hackystat Package* || *Standard Environment/Classpath Variable*  || *Sample Env Value* ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-utilities Hackystat Utilities] || HACKYSTAT_UTILITIES_HOME ||  c:\public_hackystat\hackystat-services-8.0.1015\hackystat-utilities\bin ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensorbase-uh Hackystat Sensorbase] || HACKYSTAT_SENSORBASE_HOME ||  c:\public_hackystat\hackystat-services-8.0.1015\hackystat-sensorbase-uh\bin ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-shell Hackystat SensorShell] || HACKYSTAT_SENSORSHELL_HOME ||  c:\public_hackystat\hackystat-sensors-8.0.1015\hackystat-sensor-shell\bin ||

Note that some of these packages are located in the "services" distribution, and others are located in the "sensors" distribution. 

== Referencing "deviant" versions ==

Note that if your service really needs to deviate from the standard version for some good reason, then the way to do it is to specify a service-specific environment variable. For example, if a Hackystat service named Foo needs to use a different version of Google Web Toolkit than the standard version listed above, then it should specify something like the following in its developer guide:

|| *Library* || *Deviant Version* || *Standard Environment/Classpath Variable* ||
|| [http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/versions.html Google Web Toolkit] || 1.3 || FOO_GWT_HOME ||