#summary Information about Public Releases

=== Public Release January 15, 2008 (8.0.115) ===

After approximately nine months of effort, it is with great pleasure that I announce the
public release of Hackystat 8.0.  This release is a ground-up rewrite of the framework to
support a RESTful service-oriented architecture along with many other significant
improvements.  Version 8 is significantly more scalable and enterprise-ready than Version
7. For example, we have measured throughput rates of over 1.2M sensor data instances per
hour.  We also find it to be both simpler and more fun to use than its predecessor.

We invite you to peruse the four tutorials linked to the home page, or any of the other
links that you find of interest.   Binary distributions of this release are available
there as "Featured Downloads", and of course the full source is available in the
Subversion repositories associated with the various projects. See the "Component
Directory" link for a full listing.

We hope that you will consider Hackystat for your future research, development, and/or
teaching.

Finally, I want to publicly and very gratefully acknowledge the following people who
contributed to the development of this first public release of Hackystat 8:  Austen Ito,
Cam Moore, David Nickles, Dan Port, Hongbing Kou, Julie Sakuda, Aaron Kagawa, Qin Zhang,
Robert Brewer, and Pavel Senin.

Work on release 8.1 begins first thing tomorrow morning.  I am happy to be able to
promise you that this next public release will take an order of magnitude less time to
complete than the last one! 