#summary A User Guide for installing a Hackystat System Distribution
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

This page provides a guide to installing Hackystat from a "System Distribution" found in the [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat/downloads/list Downloads] area of this Google Project.  

A Hackystat "System Distribution" consists of a set of zip files with a common version number. Together, they provide a snapshot of all releasable Hackystat sensors and services built at one time and tested against each other whenever possible. It is possible to download and install individual Hackystat sensors and services by going to their individual Google Project Hosting pages, but most users (and developers) will find it more convenient and less failure-prone to download the most recent System Distribution and use that as the basis for their activities. 

= Structure of the System Distribution =

Currently, a Hackystat System distribution consists of four zip files. For example, the November 1, 2007 System Distribution consists of the following files:

|| *File Name* || *Contents* ||
|| hackystat-8.0.1101-sensors-bin.zip  || Binaries for the (client side) Hackystat sensors ||
|| hackystat-8.0.1101-services-bin.zip || Binaries for the (server side) Hackystat services ||
|| hackystat-8.0.1101-sensors-src.zip  || Sources for the (client side) Hackystat sensors ||
|| hackystat-8.0.1101-services-src.zip || Sources for the (service side) Hackystat services ||

Normally, you are only interested in the "bin" zip files.  The "src" files are provided in case you experience a problem when installing the binaries and need to diagnose the problem by rebuilding the system from sources locally. 

The binary distributions expand into a top-level directory with the same name as the file (except for the .zip suffix), with a subdirectory for each sensor or service contained within the distribution. For example:

{{{
hackystat-8.0.1101-sensors-bin/
                              README.html
                              hackystat-sensor-ant/
                                                   antsensors.jar
                              hackystat-sensor-emacs/
                                                     sensor-package.el
                              hackystat-sensor-eclipse/
                                                       org.hackystat.sensor.eclipse_8.0.v20071101.jar
   :
   :
}}}

The README.html file simply points you to this page. 

Note that the version number, 8.0.1101, indicates the major release (8), the minor release (0), and the month/day of this build (1101, or November 1).                                                                  

At present, documentation snapshots are not packaged in these distributions. Instead, go to the online User Guides for details about each package. 

=Using a System Distribution (for Users)=

== Using the public services ==

If you are a new user of Hackystat, we recommend that you evaluate the system by using the publically available services maintained by the Collaborative Software Development Laboratory at the University of Hawaii.  Using the public services does not mean your data is public, it just means that your data will be sent to the services hosted at the University of Hawaii, which avoids the need for you to install them yourself. 

To use the public services, you must register to obtain an account at the following URL:

 * [http://dasha.ics.hawaii.edu:9876/sensorbase/register http://dasha.ics.hawaii.edu:9876/sensorbase/register]

Supply an email address to which you have access, and the system will establish an account whose name is that email address and generate a password. The system will send information about the password immediately to this email address. 

Next, download the binary "sensors" distribution, and install whichever sensors are appropriate for your development environment. The following tables lists the sensors currently in release with pointers to their installation guide:


|| *Sensor* || *User Guide* || *Description* ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-ant/ Ant Sensor] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-ant/wiki/UserGuide Ant Sensor User Guide] || Sensors implemented as Ant tasks for [http://ant.apache.org/ Ant], [http://www.junit.org JUnit], and [http://emma.sourceforge.net/ Emma] ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-xmldata/ XmlData Sensor] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-xmldata/wiki/UserGuide XmlData Sensor User Guide] || A generic interface to sending data represented in XML ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-emacs/ Emacs Sensor] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-emacs/wiki/UserGuide Emacs Sensor User Guide] || A sensor for the [http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/ Emacs] IDE ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-eclipse/ Eclipse Sensor] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-eclipse/wiki/UserGuide Eclipse Sensor User Guide] || A sensor for the [http://www.eclipse.org Eclipse] IDE ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-shell/ SensorShell] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensor-shell/wiki/UserGuide SensorShell User Guide] || "Middleware" for Hackystat sensor development || 

Once you have installed the sensors and are successfully sending data, you can invoke Hackystat "analyses" to gain insight into your software development processes and products.  (More documentation on Hackystat analyses will be forthcoming.) 

== Using locally installed services ==

If you wish to install and run the Hackystat services locally, then in addition to downloading the binary "sensors" distribution, you must also download the binary "services" distribution.  The services distribution includes both "analysis" services, which normally provide only a REST API as their interface, and "ui" services, which provide a browser-based or other human-oriented user interface. 

The Services System Distribution currently contains the following analysis services: 

|| *Analysis Service* || *User Guide* || *Description* ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensorbase-uh/ SensorBase] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-sensorbase-uh/wiki/UserGuide SensorBase User Guide] || A repository for sensor data collected by sensors. ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-analysis-dailyprojectdata/ DailyProjectData] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-analysis-dailyprojectdata/wiki/UserGuide DailyProjectData User Guide] || An analysis providing measures of project processes/products for a given day. ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-analysis-telemetry/ Telemetry] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-analysis-telemetry/wiki/UserGuide Telemetry User Guide] || An analysis providing the "Software Project Telemetry" language for project measurement trend definition and analysis. ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-utilities/ Utilities] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-utilities/wiki/UserGuide Utilities User Guide] || Developer utilities for sensor and service development, including Time, TStamp, TStampSet, !HackystatLogger, and !UriCache. ||

It also includes the following User Interface services:

|| *UI Service* || *User Guide* || *Description* ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-ui-sensordataviewer/ SensorDataViewer] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-ui-sensordataviewer/wiki/UserGuide SensorDataViewer User Guide] || A web and Google Gadget interface for monitoring sensor data transmission by sensors to a !SensorBase. ||
|| [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-ui-sensordatabrowser/ SensorDataBrowser] || [http://code.google.com/p/hackystat-ui-sensordatabrowser/wiki/UserGuide SensorDataBrowser User Guide] || A web interface for browsing the sensor data stored at a !SensorBase. ||

Consult the User Guides for more information on how to install, configure, and  use these services. 

=Using a System Distribution (for Developers)=

For developers, one benefit of the System Distribution is to simplify dependency management.  With one download, a developer can obtain recent binaries for lower-level services that can be used as the value of the HACKYSTAT_UTILITIES_HOME, HACKYSTAT_SENSORBASE_HOME, HACKYSTAT_DAILYPROJECTDATA_HOME, and HACKYSTAT_SENSORSHELL_HOME environment and classpath variables. For example, I added the following lines to my ~/.profile file in order to set up my environment to point to a recent System Distribution on my !MacBook Pro:

{{{
export HACKYSTAT_DIST_VERSION=8.0.1101
export HACKYSTAT_SENSORS_DIST_HOME=/Users/johnson/java/hackystat-$HACKYSTAT_DIST_VERSION-sensors-bin
export HACKYSTAT_SERVICES_DIST_HOME=/Users/johnson/java/hackystat-$HACKYSTAT_DIST_VERSION-services-bin

export HACKYSTAT_UTILITIES_HOME=$HACKYSTAT_SERVICES_DIST_HOME/hackystat-utilities
export HACKYSTAT_SENSORBASE_HOME=$HACKYSTAT_SERVICES_DIST_HOME/hackystat-sensorbase-uh
export HACKYSTAT_DAILYPROJECTDATA_HOME=$HACKYSTAT_SERVICES_DIST_HOME/hackystat-analysis-dailyprojectdata
export HACKYSTAT_SENSORSHELL_HOME=$HACKYSTAT_SENSORS_DIST_HOME/hackystat-sensor-shell
}}}

What makes this particularly convenient is that when a new System Distribution is released, I can download the binary distributions, unzip them, and then change only the first environment variable in order to update the pointers to all binaries. 
