#summary Conventions for Version 8 Google Projects
#labels Featured

To best support collaboration in the development of Hackystat Version 8 services, please observe the following conventions:

==Project Naming:==
  * Use all lower case letters.
  * Name your project hackystat-<serviceflavor>-<servicetype>.  <serviceflavor> is one of: sensor, sensorbase, analysis, or ui.  <servicetype> should describe the specific service, for example, "eclipse", or "dailyprojectdata".  

Examples: hackystat-sensor-eclipse, hackystat-ui-sensordataviewer, hackystat-analysis-dailyprojectdata.

Note that "hackystat-sensorbase-uh" is an exception to this naming convention, as the <servicetype> component indicates an organization (University of Hawaii) rather than the  service type.  This is because there really aren't different "types" of sensorbase services as there are for sensors, analyses, and UI services. (There can be different implementations of the sensorbase, but they should be pretty much functionally equivalent.) 

==Links (Administrator page):==
 * Please define a link called "Hackystat Version 8" that points to http://code.google.com/p/hackystat/

==Blogs (Administrator page):==
 * Please provide a link to the Engineering Log associated with the developers of this service.

==Groups (Administrator page):==
 * Please associate your project with the following groups: hackystat-announce, hackystat-dev, hackystat-users, and hackystat-svn.

==Activity notifications (Administrator page):==
 * Please send SVN commit and Issue change notices to: hackystat-svn@googlegroups.com

 



